ELEMENTALS It is in changing that we find purpose. 

# ATÆSHIA, QUEEN OF ASH When the gods formed the Mundane World, they took sparks of creation from the roiling plane of Quintessence and gave sentience to some of the universe’s most basic elements—air, fire, earth, and water. Some elementals contain just one of these components, but can come to embody multiple reagents as they age. 
# DUALITY OF FORM Elementals are mercurial creatures of transformation, creation, and destruction. Though the deities first created the Mundane World, elementals cultivated and shaped it. When a tree, stone, or other aspect of the world doesn’t suit an elemental, they break it down with fire, wind, or another element, then build it anew. Elementals themselves also change like the winds and the tides, and from age to age, they remake themselves to reflect what the world has become. They are protectors armored by stone, lizards ablaze with fire, and sometimes dragons clad in steel. 
# REBIRTH AND REFORMATION When an elemental dies in the Mundane World, their spirit returns to Quintessence, where they must rest for decades to regain strength. Should the spirit return to the Mundane World, they take on a form that reflects a creature or other aspect of that plane. 
# CRUX OF FIRE The crux of fire, often called a blazecaster, takes the form of a fiery lizard. They often live in hot zones of planar convergence or areas of volcanic activity. These territorial elementals usually question interlopers from afar—and if they don’t like the answers, they rain down fire before their foes can draw near. While many elementals weave their innate gifts into oral storytelling, cruxes of fire are particularly adroit at animating their stories in silhouettes of flame. 
# ESSENCE OF STORMS At a distance, most would mistake an essence of storms, or galeweaver, for a large bird of prey. This majestic creature is formed from streaks of colored cloud stuff woven into the silhouette of a large eagle or falcon. Galeweavers act as scouts for their ishkrars, and they’re usually the first to see trouble. Also insatiably curious, the essences often swoop down to talk when they see travelers. 
# ESSENCE OF TIDES An essence of tides looks like a shimmering blue manta ray that glides over land as easily as through water, earning them the common name of tidedrifter. Most common along coastlines, essences of tides enjoy harmless pranks, especially against regulars who sail or swim in their waters. With the tidedrifter’s healthy sense of humor, it’s not hard to win their friendship—but their relaxed demeanor evaporates if friend or family faces threat. 
# FIELD OF GROWTH The field of growth takes the form of a massive centipede made of vegetation. Often called verdant primevals, these caretakers of the natural cycle of life (and death) fight those they see as upsetting that cycle. Fields of growth seek not only to destroy undead and those who create them, but to sabotage divine servitors who casually peddle resurrection magic. 
# FORCE OF EARTH A protective earth elemental, a force of earth resembles a nine-foot-tall great ape formed of dirt and rough stone. They act as guardians and historians to their ishkrar, working tirelessly to thwart ills from befalling the group. These elementals are sometimes called earthen bulwarks. 
# ELEMENTAL LANGUAGES Most elementals speak Low Kuric. Some can use Caelian when they need to. 