THE PURPOSE OF MONSTERS In Draw Steel, you will face monsters. Each goblin, human, or zombie you encounter has the potential to become a monster that the heroes must overcome. This book provides you with tools to use in these moments, as well as opportunities to explore who these creatures are before and after coming to blows. EVERY GOBLIN HAS A STORY In Draw Steel, the relationship between hero and monster is a contextual one. Before and after conflict, a monster is another character in the story. Their status doesn’t rely on whether a creature who regularly acts as a hero is nearby. Therefore, the monster stat block represents a moment in time. It is an imperfect translation of a creature while they act as a monster in opposition to a hero. While the hero players have to keep track of a character sheet for the entirety of the game, the Director player uses a monster stat block solely while running combat. Including every detail about each creature they need to control in conflict with the heroes can and will slow the game down. The game asks you to imagine these creatures more complexly than the damage they deal to each other. Hero players have access to abilities, skills, and motivations that don’t involve fighting monsters, and the same is true for all creatures. Most creatures in this book have a language, a culture, and some multifaceted relationship to the world they exist in. They can share the same careers, upbringings, and complications that the heroes can. They can even become allies to the heroes, adventuring alongside them as retainers or in contest with them as rivals. Directors can utilize their own character sheets that detail important creature’s motivations, skills, and features in addition to their stat block. This can be a useful reference for keeping a character consistent across adventuring tests and negotiations, especially for enduring villains. WHEN CREATURES BECOME MONSTERS A monster imposes their will on the world at the expense of someone else. They take control of the land, summon a terrible force to destroy it, or simply bring harm to someone weaker than them. However, a creature driven by instinct that hunts for food is not a monster unless they hunt outside their needs or their territory. Without malice or cruel ambitions that can be opposed, they are no different from a force of nature. Therefore, a creature becomes a monster when their malice meets opposition. This often boils down to the monster fights the hero over the fate of someone else. The game utilizes each monster in a way that challenges the hero players to use their abilities and overcome their will. WHEN MONSTERS BECOME VILLAINS If a creature is always a monster, then they are a villain. Every aspect of a villain’s values and worldview is imposed upon someone else, to the point where a villain’s very existence is always in direct opposition to a hero. Villains tend to have more personal relationships to heroes. There are universal or moral reasons for heroes and monsters to come to blows with one another, such as “hurting people is wrong” or “that doesn’t belong to you.” But only a villain can take something important from a hero, stand for everything that they oppose, or reflect the hero’s worldview in a way that leaves the world worse off. Usually, villains last much longer than their 
stamina: would imply. It’s not enough to oppose a villain with might; the hero needs justice! Their will needs to be deconstructed and proven wrong before the villain is defeated in a way that is cathartic to the hero and satisfying for all players. The stat block only represents the creature in battle. If the villain is reduced to 0 
stamina: in combat but their main conflict with the heroes is not resolved, then they have only lost the battle instead of the war. They can make their retreat, lick their wounds, and try again later. Or if death is inevitable and their will is strong enough, they can haunt the hero as a revenant until one side finally relents. COMING TO THE TABLE Each person who plays Draw Steel will have a different impression of monsters based on their own experience. In the real world, “monster” has come to mean other, or that which is not us. The monster is an unknowable threat until it is either known or no more. Often, “monster” describes ferocious beasts that can’t be prevented from doing us harm. Horrifyingly more often, “monster” is used as a label for groups of people and whole cultures, usually as a means of denying their humanity. Meanwhile in games, “monster” is a clinical term for an opposing force. The monster is the away team. It describes game actors that challenge the player’s ability to achieve their goal. The monster has traits and actions that the player must overcome using their own traits and actions. The monster provides the reason for the player to have those traits and actions in the first place. It's worthwhile to discuss how each of you would like to engage with Draw Steel ahead of embarking on a new adventure. Because again, you will face monsters, and conflict in the game should be more interesting than disagreements above it. EVERYONE LOVES ZOMBIES There are going to be groups of players for whom imagining monsters beyond their game definition isn’t fun and requires too much effort to be satisfying. Draw Steel comes with an assortment of zombies, undead, demons, and now war dogs that can be fought with impunity. There will always be a need for heroes to rise up and protect innocent people from these monsters, and it is no less heroic than overcoming a complex monster. MONSTER BASICS To use this book, you’ll also want to review the information found in Heroes. If you read that first, most of the information presented in a creature’s stat block is self-explanatory, and matches the statistics of hero player characters. However, a few differences are worth noting. (Playtest note: Right now, creatures are color coded, but this won’t be the only way we indicate different features. Icons are coming too. What are presented in this packet are temporary playtest stat blocks until we get real layout.) FOR THE DIRECTOR The information in this Bestiary playtest packet is for the Director, and all references to “you” in the packet refer to the director. If you’re a player who isn’t planning on also running games, you should stop reading now so your foes’ abilities remain a surprise. LANGUAGES If a creature knows at least one language, their stat block has a Languages entry that shows the languages they know. Creatures who don’t know any languages don’t have this entry. KEYWORDS Each creature has one or more keywords. These keywords don’t necessarily mean anything on their own, but special rules might apply to them. For instance, a creature with the Goblin keyword benefits from and can contribute to goblin Malice features. GENERAL KEYWORDS While many keywords are specific to a group of creatures, like Gnoll or Human, there are also keywords that are found across different monster groups. • Abyssal: Abyssal creatures, like demons and gnolls, can trace their origins back to the Abyssal Wasteland—a chaotic manifold where the natives hunger for the souls of mortal creatures. • Accursed: Accursed creatures, like medusas and werewolves, are under the effect of a powerful supernatural curse that changes their very nature. • Animal: This is an easy one! Animals are bears, wolves, and really big spiders! Aside from the animals of the real world, creatures with a similar level of sapience and who are part of the natural world have the Animal keyword. Animals have only natural defenses. • Beast: Beasts are creatures with animal-level sapience who have supernatural abilities or traits. Basilisks and chimeras are examples of beasts—they don’t have a society, but one has eye beams that can turn you into a statue and the other has three heads, each normally found on a different species and one of which breathes fire! • Construct: Construct creatures, like the ashen hoarder and valok, are manufactured. Magic or psionics play a role in giving these creatures life. Their level of sapience is determined by the will and skill of their creator. Some function entirely on their own while others serve as mindless drones, who only take action if given orders. Unless otherwise noted, these creatures don’t need to eat, drink water, sleep, or breathe to survive. • Dragon: Dragons, the giant reptilian creatures with breath weapons, wings, claws, and jaws, aren’t the only creatures who get the Dragon keyword. Creatures who are related to dragons, such as draconians, also have this keyword. • Elemental: If a creature can trace their origin back to Quintessence, the Manifold of Elements, they’re an elemental. This includes creatures of raw elemental power, such as the crux of fire, and creatures who merely trace some part of their origin back to the plane, like meteor dragons. • Fey: Fey creatures can trace their origin back to Arcadia, a manifold of nature and magic—the home of all elves. Creatures from this plane tend to have a natural connection to nature, magic, or both. • Giant: Giants include ogres, trolls, and, of course, fire, frost, hill, and stone giants. Giants have a similar limb arrangement to humanoid, but they’re much larger. Despite their similar appearance, these creatures have no relation to most humanoids (other than the mighty hakaan). Their origins are entirely separate. • Horror: Horrors creatures, including overminds and voiceless talkers, are creatures who seem unnatural on most worlds, particularly Orden. Everything about them is alien. Most have potent psionic abilities. • Humanoid: Humanoids, like dwarves and time raiders, are size: 1 creatures who have similar limb arrangements and sapience on par with humans. Many humanoids gather in communities and form societies to survive and prosper. • Infernal: Infernal creatures, like devils and hobgoblins, can trace their origins back to the Seven Cities of Hell— an ordered manifold where the natives make plans to tempt mortals into contracts for their souls. • Plant: Plant creatures, like the shambling mound, are made of vegetation. Like other creatures (and unlike plant objects), they can move and interact with their environment. They’re living plants! • Swarm: Swarm creatures are actually more than one creature! They’re a whole bunch of creatures, like a swarm of spiders, that move and act together as if they were one creature. • Undead: Undead creatures, like ghosts and zombies, are the reanimated flesh and spirits of creatures who have died. Their level of sapience is determined by the will and skill of the creature who brought them back from the dead. Some function entirely on their own while others mindlessly seek to harm the living if given no instructions from their creator. Unless otherwise noted, these creatures don’t need to eat, drink water, sleep, or breathe to survive. ENCOUNTER VALUE Each Director-controlled creature has an encounter value (abbreviated 
ev:) that is used in building encounters. See Encounter Building for more information. CREATURE FREE STRIKES When a Director-controlled creature makes a free strike, they don’t roll. Instead, their stat block features a 
free_strike: stat representing the amount of damage they deal with a melee free strike with a distance of melee 1 or the creature’s signature action, whichever is higher. This is also the amount of damage they deal with a ranged free strike with a distance equal to 5 or the range of the creature’s signature action, whichever is higher. A creature’s free strike has the Strike keyword and any of the following words found in their signature action: Magic, Psionic, or Weapon. Additionally, if the creature’s signature action deals damage with a type, the free strike also uses that type. If the creature’s signature action deals more than one type of damage, the Director decides which damage type the creature’s free strike uses when the attack is made. Creature free strikes are a static number for two reasons. First, it keeps gameplay fast. You don’t have to stop play to roll dice, and there’s no chance of a creature rolling a critical hit and bogging things down further when it isn’t their turn. Second, by keeping these static values relatively low, heroes are encouraged to take more risks when it really counts, even if that might result in them taking damage from a free strike. CREATURE OPPORTUNITY ATTACKS Even though a Director-controlled creature doesn’t have to roll when they make a free strike, if they have a bane on attacks against a creature, they still can’t make an opportunity attack against them. SIGNATURE ACTION Every creature has a signature action, which is the first action that appears in their stat block. TRAITS Many creatures have traits, which are features that don’t require an action, maneuver, or triggered action to activate, such as the goblin monarch’s Crafty trait. 

# MALICE 
Many creatures have abilities and features that require a resource called malice to activate. See Malice for more information. END EFFECT Certain creatures have the ability to take damage in order to end one EoE (end of encounter) effect currently affecting them. The damage the creature takes to end the effect can’t be reduced in any way. VILLAIN ACTIONS The solo and leader creatures presented in this book are designed to be fought in climactic battles at the end of an adventure or campaign. Because of this, they get special abilities called villain actions. A creature with villain actions always has three. Each villain action can be used only once per encounter, and no more than one villain action can be used per round. A creature can use a villain action at the end of any other creature’s turn during combat. Villain actions are numbered and intended to be used in a specific order that creates a logical encounter flow and cinematic arc, but you can use them in any order you choose. The first villain action is an opener, which shows the heroes they’re not battling a typical creature. Openers generally deal some damage, summon a lackey or three, buff the leader, debuff the heroes, or move the creature into an advantageous position. They’re a taste of what’s to come. The second villain action provides crowd control. It typically activates after the heroes have had a chance to respond once or twice to the villain, move into position, and surround the villain. This second action helps the villain regain the upper hand. Like an opener, this action comes in many flavors, but it’s even more powerful than an opener. The third and final villain action is an ultimate move or “ult”—a showstopper that the villain can use to deal a devastating blow to the heroes before the end of the battle. If you have more than two creatures with villain actions in an encounter (which should be a rare, if at all occurrence), only one villain action total may be used per round. 
# MONSTER ORGANIZATIONS 
A level 1 ghoul isn’t necessarily as strong as a level 1 orc! Most creature types have an overarching organization that determines the power level and encounter value of the monsters within it. Some organizations prefer to use large amounts of weaker creatures in encounters while others prefer fewer, more formidable threats. The monster organizations of a creature type are labeled near the front of each type’s writeup. Many creature types either have a main organization and a handful of minions, while several creature types are a collection of a few different monster organizations. The following list offers an overview of each organization and suggestions for deploying them within an encounter. MINION Minions are weaker enemies who are made to die fast and threaten heroes en masse. A battle with minions is one where the heroes are outnumbered and get the joy of cutting through fields of their enemies. Creatures organized as minions are meant to support other monster organizations and have a special set of rules for doing so. Minions die quickly! Some may die before they get a chance to act. That’s okay! It’s why you build encounters with them eight at a time. See Minions for more information. BAND Monster bands are hardier and work in smaller groups than minions, but it still takes multiple of these creatures to effectively threaten a single hero of the same level. A battle against all band creatures has them outnumbering the heroes at a ratio of about two to one. Creatures under the band organization can be especially effective when brought into encounters alongside other monster bands. Band creatures are more fragile than anything that isn’t a minion, so be sure to double or triple up on stat blocks that you think are key to a combat encounter with them. There’s a chance that if the heroes win initiative and have a lot of victories, they can kill a key band creature before they get to act. That’s why the encounter-building guidelines allow you to have lots of them. PLATOON Monster platoons are highly organized and usually self-sufficient armies. Platoons are well-rounded organizations that usually come equipped to handle most combat objectives. A single platoon creature is a decent threat to a hero of the same level, so an encounter consisting entirely of these creatures typically has one per hero. Platoon creatures can often fight alongside minions and a troop or two to round out their ranks. TROOP Troops are the functional opposite of minions. A creature under the troop organization is hardy and can usually stand up to two heroes of the same level on their own. Troops also have a high encounter value. They work well when individually supporting other monster organizations, but they can also be effective on their own. LEADER A leader is a powerful who buffs their allies and grants them extra actions. They utilize villain actions and can stand toe-to-toe with at least two heroes of the same level all on their own. Typically only one leader appears in a battle at a time alongside minions, band creatures, platoon creatures, and troops. SOLO A creature under a solo organization is an encounter all on their own. They have a special set of rules within their stat block. Solos can be deployed, well, solo! They can typically stand toe-to-toe with five heroes of their level. CREATURE ROLES A creature’s role describes its function in combat in a general sense. Roles are descriptive, and most don’t follow special rules—they simply help you build encounters and use creatures effectively in combat. AMBUSHER Ambushers are melee warriors who can slip by beefier heroes to reach squishier targets in the back lines. ARTILLERY Artillery creatures fight best from afar, and can use their most powerful abilities at great distance. BRUTE Brutes are hardy creatures who have lots of 
stamina: and deal lots of damage. They have abilities and traits that make them difficult to ignore and hard to get away from, and that let them push enemies around. CONTROLLER Controllers are creatures who change the battlefield, often with magic or psionics. They reposition foes and alter terrain to make it more advantageous for their allies. Controllers are often on the squishier side, so they need some protection! DEFENDER Defenders are tough creatures able to take a lot of damage, and who can force enemies to attack them instead of squishier targets. Defenders often act in squads with allies who have lower 
stamina:, such as controllers and hexers. HARRIER Harriers are mobile warriors who make definitive use of hit-and-run tactics. Their traits allow them to make the most of their positioning on the battlefield. HEXER Hexers specialize in debuffing enemies with conditions and other effects. They are generally squishy and rely on allies to help defend them. MOUNT Mounts are mobile creatures meant to be ridden in combat, and who make their riders even more dangerous. SUPPORT Support creatures specialize in aiding their allies, providing buffs, healing, movement, or action options. CREATURES WHO DEFEND If a creature takes the Defend action, they can’t take additional actions during their turn. Likewise, if a creature has already taken an action on their turn, they aren’t able to also take the Defend action. This applies even if the creature is granted an additional action on their turn, unless they are specifically granted an additional Defend action. CREATURES WHO GRAB If a creature has an ability or trait that allows them to grab another creature, they can have only one creature grabbed at a time unless their stat block specifies otherwise. If the creature has already grabbed the maximum number of creatures, the ability or trait used to grab can’t be used against another target unless the creature releases an already grabbed target. CREATURES WHO SUMMON Unless otherwise specified, a creature or object that is summoned to the field by another creature takes their turn immediately after the summoner. Once a summoning ability has been used, it can’t be used again until the start of the summoner’s next turn. 
# MALICE 
Just as every hero has a Heroic Resource determined by their class, so too do the heroes’ foes need their own juice to fuel their strongest threats. Malice is a resource gained by the Director. You use malice to let enemies in the game activate their most powerful abilities and throw surprises at the heroes during combat. EARNING 
# MALICE 
At the start of combat, you gain malice equal to the average number of Victories per hero. Then at the start of each round of combat, you gain malice equal to the number of heroes in the battle, plus the number of the round of combat that has just begun. For instance, if five heroes with three Victories each are just starting their first round of combat, then you gain 9 malice—3 for the average number of Victories, 5 for the number of heroes, and 1 for it being the first round of combat. At the start of the second round, provided all the heroes are still alive, you gain 7 malice. Third round: 8 malice, fourth round: 9 malice, and so on. If a hero dies, they stop generating malice for you in this way. At the end of an encounter, all your malice disappears. It’s up to you if you want to show your players how much malice you have. Some Directors feel the tension of watching malice creep up and can create great drama, while others like to keep the players guessing about what could come next. Do whatever is most fun for your group, and if you’re not sure, ask your players what they would prefer! SPENDING 
# MALICE 
Non-minion monsters can spend malice the way heroes spend their heroic resources, activating and enhancing their abilities. Abilities that make use of malice have the cost noted in a creature’s stat block. Specific types of monsters sometimes have other ways they can spend malice, typically on features that affect an entire group of enemies, actions or maneuvers they can take during their turn, or events that affect the encounter environment. Such features can be found in the “[Creature] Malice” stat block after the creature type’s overall write-up. You won’t be able to spend your malice on every single option a given encounter has to offer. It’s totally up to you how you deploy malice. You can spend it on smaller, but still impactful, features each round. You can save it up and use it on some very dramatic abilities. You can spend it on the same feature that uses all your malice each round and then forget about it until the next. Do whatever is most fun for you and your players in a given encounter. MINIONS What they lack in power, minions make up for in flexibility and controlling the map. Creatures under this monster organization work a little differently from other creatures—they’re multiple monsters that function as a single unit under your control. The knowledge of how minions work isn’t a secret and shouldn’t be kept from the players. Share the information in this section with them! They’ll have a lot more fun battling minions and shaping narrative around taking out multiple foes at once if they understand how the rules work. ORGANIZED AS SQUADS Minions with the same name (for instance, “goblin sniper”) can be organized into squads of up to eight creatures. All members of a minion squad act together on the same initiative, and can make squad attacks (see Squad Action). SHARED LOW 
stamina: Minions have low 
stamina: and fall quickly in battle. They allow heroes to feel extra heroic, since a hero might kill several minions at once, depending on those minions’ level and encounter value! Each squad of minions shares a 
stamina: pool, with initial 
stamina: equal to each individual minion’s 
stamina: multiplied by the number of minions in the squad. For example, goblin spinecleavers each have 
stamina: 5, so a squad of eight runners has a 
stamina: pool of 40. Whenever a minion in a squad takes damage, the squad’s 
stamina: pool is reduced by a number equal to the damage taken. Because minion 
stamina: is tracked as a pool, minions can’t be winded and can’t regain 
stamina: during a battle. DROPPING ONE MINION Whenever a minion squad’s 
stamina: pool is reduced by an amount equal to an individual minion’s 
stamina:, one minion dies or otherwise gets taken out of the fight. If a squad of goblin spinecleavers has its 
stamina: pool reduced to 35, then the minion who took the damage that reduced the pool dies. When the 
stamina: pool hits 30, 25, 20, 15, 10, 5, and finally 0, another minion in the squad dies. If multiple minions take the damage that results in the pool dropping low enough to kill one minion, the creature who dealt the damage to the minions decides which of those minions dies. DROPPING MULTIPLE MINIONS If a single strike reduces a minion squad’s 
stamina: pool by an amount of damage equal to the 
stamina: of multiple minions, multiple minions are taken out by the damage. Start with minions who took the damage first. If all those minions are eliminated and there is still more damage to account for, the minions nearest to the ones who were taken out suffer the same fate. For instance, if one goblin spinecleaver takes 12 damage from a fury’s Brutal Slam ability, that runner dies and another nearby spinecleaver also gets taken out. Allow the player to narrate how their hero takes out additional minions killed by a single attack. Maybe each minion is within striking distance of the hero, who makes multiple brutal weapon attacks with a single action. Maybe the body of the original target is hurled into an unfortunate ally. Maybe additional minions affected by a single attack pass out from fright! Taking out multiple minions is a chance to play up the cinematic part of the game. DAMAGING MULTIPLE MINIONS Minion squads are particularly susceptible to damage-dealing area abilities and attacks that target multiple creatures, because the minion squad’s 
stamina: pool takes damage each time an individual minion takes damage. If three goblin minions are hit with a conduit’s Lightfall ability that deals 4 holy damage to each target in its area, the minion pool loses 12 
stamina:! PREPPING MINION 
stamina: POOLS When you’re preparing a battle with minions, it helps to take a moment and write out the different amounts of damage at which a minion squad suffers a loss of one of their minions. For instance, a squad of goblin spinecleaver loses a minion when they take a total of 5, 10, 15, 20, 35, 30, 35, and 40 damage. If you do the math before combat starts (or take a quick moment to jot it down during a pause in combat), it’ll help things run smoothly. WHOA! THOSE MINIONS DIED TOO QUICKLY! Minions are made to die fast, but if the heroes get to go first, have a lot of damaging area abilities and your minions are all bunched together, your minions might all go down a little faster than you planned—before they even get a chance to do anything. It’s a good idea to start with minions a little bit spread out from each other, enough so heroes can still make use of their area abilities without entirely decimating your forces. If they do manage to kill all your minions in one fowl swoop, remember that you can always have some reinforcements show up! ACTING TOGETHER When minions act, each minion in the squad must use their action in concert. This is because minions have squad attacks that require participation from all minions, requiring all individual attacks to happen at the same time. Like all creatures, an individual minion—or all the minions in a squad—can elect to take no action on a turn. MINION ACTION ECONOMY Minion turns are meant to be short. On their turn, each minion can take only a move action and an action, a move action and a maneuver, or two move actions. Minions can make opportunity attacks, but they typically don’t have bespoke triggered actions, keeping them easy to run. SQUAD ACTION Each minion has a signature action that is an attack ability targeting one creature or object. When multiple minions in a squad use their signature action on a turn, make one roll for the whole squad. Each target of their signature action is only affected by one instance of the ability—when two (or three at maximum) of the squad’s minions target the same creature or object with their signature action, each additional minion makes a free strike against that target instead. It’s usually more effective to have each minion target a different hero. As an example, a squad of three demon pitlings are attacking a shadow and a conduit with their Spit ability. One pitling targets the shadow while two pitlings target the conduit. The additional pitling targeting the conduit makes a free strike against them. The shadow and the conduit take 4 damage each from the ability, and the conduit takes an additional 2 damage from the free strike. If a minion squad gets a critical hit with their signature action, then all the minions who participated in using the action can use the action again. TRACKING SQUADS If you use multiple squads made up of the same type of minions in an encounter—for instance, two squads of goblin spinecleavers—it’s important to make it easy for the players to tell the squads apart. You can use different miniatures for each squad, or give each squad’s miniatures an indicator (a colored magnet, ring, sticker, and so forth) to help you and your players keep track of which minions are part of the same squad as they start moving around on the battlefield. Many online virtual tabletops have tools for adding colors or textures to icons that make tracking different squads easy. ATTACHED CAPTAIN Any non-mount creature who speaks a language a squad of minions can understand can be attached to that squad as a captain. Captains aren’t necessarily strategic leaders with brilliant strategies. Sometimes they’re just powerful creatures who bully, inspire, or have some supernatural influence that drives other creatures to action. A squad of minions can only have one captain, and a creature can’t be captain to more than one squad of minions. SEPARATE ACTIONS AND 
stamina: A captain takes their turn at the same time as the members of their squad but isn’t limited in their action options as minions are. A captain’s 
stamina: isn’t added to a minion squad’s 
stamina: pool and is tracked as for any other creature in combat. CAPTAIN BENEFITS While a minion squad has a captain, each minion in the squad gains the 
With Captain benefits listed on their stat block. Usually, this benefit is either a damage boost, a bonus to speed, or starting the encounter with temporary 
stamina:. I AM THE CAPTAIN NOW If a squad of minions loses their captain, a new allied creature can become that squad’s captain at the start of the round (no action required). ENCOUNTER BUILDING We’re still working on these guidelines, and need to add information about how environment, party composition, and the like affect encounters. But for this playtest, the basics of encounter building are as follows. IT’S NOT SCIENCE While we’d love to create an encounter building formula that could predict the exact difficulty of encounter, there are too many variables beyond the monsters you choose that we can’t account for. The heroes your players build, the maps you choose, the number of treasures they have, lucky and unlucky dice rolls, each player’s tactical acumen, and a bad day at the office before game night can all contribute to an encounter going better or worse for the heroes as they play the game. While these guidelines can help get you closer to the difficulty you desire, it’s going to take a little bit of trial and error to get things right. For example, if your group has a lot of damaging abilities with the Area keyword, they’re going to have an easier time standing up to minions. If you have heroes who specialize in single-target abilities, then they might be able to quickly destroy a solo. Learn what makes a fun, challenging encounter for your group and adjust these guidelines to fit your needs. Remember—there can always be reinforcements on the way for any side who needs it if your encounter is too easy or hard. STEP 1: CHOOSE ENCOUNTER DIFFICULTY First, determine how difficult an encounter you want to create based on the following guidelines. TRIVIAL ENCOUNTERS Trivial encounters are easier than easy. They present no challenge at all for the heroes, who are guaranteed to survive the battle with their 
stamina: mostly, if not entirely, untouched. Think 10th-level heroes taking on a small band of typical kobolds. There’s no way it ends well for the kobolds. These encounters can be fun to occasionally throw into your game, but for many groups, the novelty disappears quickly, so that too many trivial encounters can feel like a waste of time. Unless you determine otherwise, trivial encounters don’t earn the heroes any Victories. EASY ENCOUNTERS Unless the heroes have already depleted most of their 
stamina: and Recoveries, easy encounters won’t threaten their lives. Easy encounters are great for adventures that want to give the heroes a lot of battles between respites, or for when you want the heroes to feel like superheroes while still overcoming a combat challenge that feels as though it’s within their pay grade. An easy encounter is worth 1 Victory. STANDARD ENCOUNTERS Standard encounters are the most common for many adventuring groups. These battles deplete some of the heroes’ 
stamina: and Recoveries, especially from melee-focused heroes. Although character death is uncommon in a standard encounter, it isn’t impossible, especially if a player makes a poor tactical choice or just finds that the dice are against them. A standard encounter is worth 1 Victory. HARD ENCOUNTERS Hard encounters are typically climactic encounters with leaders and their loyal servants, or some other scenario that puts the heroes’ lives in an equal amount of peril. Hard encounters are winnable, but the heroes need to play smart to survive. A hard encounter is worth 2 Victories. EXTREME ENCOUNTERS Extreme encounters feature threats of a level that the heroes aren’t likely to survive if they try to fight to the bitter end. Such encounters rarely appear in most campaigns, though if the heroes are 8th level or higher, they can typically survive such encounters—or have a good chance of coming back to life afterward. If the heroes overcome an extreme encounter, they should be awarded at least 2 Victories. ENCOUNTERS SHOULD HAVE NARRATIVE IMPORTANCE Combat encounters should hold narrative weight. Draw Steel isn’t a game of attrition, where a few trivial combat encounters can weaken the heroes to winnow down some of their resources to make the final, important, epic clash with the villain a bit more of a struggle. A quick combat encounter with two bumbling guards at a gate is likely over in a matter of less than a round and shouldn’t give the heroes a Victory. It’s probably better handled with a test. These can be fun scenes to roleplay, but they aren’t going to make full use of your heroes’ features and should only occur sometimes. Most of the time when combat occurs, the stakes for the heroes and the story should be high! STEP 2: DETERMINE ENCOUNTER DIFFICULTY To determine how many creatures and other types of challenges you should have in an encounter, you need to figure out the heroes’ encounter strength (abbreviated ES). To calculate a group’s ES, first determine each hero’s encounter worth. This starts at a baseline of 4, then you add 2 for each level of the hero. For instance, a 3rd-level hero has an encounter worth of 10 (4 + 2 + 2 +2). Then add the encounter worth of all heroes together, and that’s your ES. For instance, a group of five 3rd-level heroes has an ES of 50. Level 1 Hero or 3 Victories Two Heroes Three Four Five Six Seven Eight 1 6 12 18 24 30 36 42 48 2 8 16 24 32 40 48 56 64 3 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 4 12 24 36 48 60 72 84 96 5 14 28 42 56 70 84 98 112 6 16 32 48 64 80 96 112 128 7 18 36 54 72 90 108 126 144 8 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160 9 22 44 66 88 110 132 154 176 10 24 48 72 96 120 144 168 192 FACTOR IN VICTORIES Victories make heroes more powerful on their way to the next level. For each 2 Victories the heroes earn, increase the overall ES as if there were another hero in the party. For instance, if a party of 3rd-level heroes has 3 Victories, increase the ES by 21. If they have 6 Victories, increase the ES by 42. Be careful that the larger ES doesn’t lead you to using more creatures than recommended in Number of Creatures. It’s usually better to use higher cost creatures in an encounter rather than add lots when increasing ES thanks to Victories. Since you can rarely predict the exact order in which the heroes will face encounters during an adventure, it helps to keep a list of monsters with an 
ev: cost worth roughly the encounter worth of one, two, and three heroes that make sense for the adventure you’re running. You can easily drop or swap these creatures into an encounter on the fly. STEP 3: DETERMINE ENCOUNTER BUDGET Once you know your ES and have chosen your encounter difficulty, you can determine your encounter budget as follows: • Trivial encounters have a budget that is anything less than your ES minus one hero’s encounter worth. • Easy encounters have a budget of anything less than your ES but more than a trivial encounter budget. • Standard encounters have a budget that is between your ES and your ES plus one hero’s encounter worth. • Hard encounters have a budget greater than a standard encounter but no more than your ES plus three heroes’ encounter worth. • Extreme encounters have a budget that is anything greater than hard. HOW FIGHTS MANY BEFORE A RESPITE? Many Directors want to know how many encounters a group can handle before they need to take a respite to regain their recoveries. Like encounter building, there isn’t an exact science behind how many encounters a party can experience before needing to take a respite. The luck of the dice, number of treasures, and the exact composition of encounters and the party of heroes all factor into this math. Heck, some heroes will want to stop for a respite while they still have plenty of Recoveries because they have a downtime project they want to advance or enough Victories to turn into XP and level up. Even if we could account for all those things, there would still be some outlier experiences where your party might have to stop and rest a little earlier than you predicted or they’ll be able to push through. We think that’s a good thing. Part of the fun of roleplaying games is the fact that they’re unpredictable and the dice and decisions the heroes make are a big part of the story. When players push on because they have a lot of Victories, that’s the game working as intended. We can give you some idea of when a party of heroes will have to stop and take a respite. A group can generally handle about 4 to 6 Victories worth of combat encounters before needing to stop for a respite to refresh their 
stamina: and Recoveries. STEP 4: SPEND ENCOUNTER BUDGET You spend your encounter budget to “buy” hostile creatures to take part in your encounter. Each hostile creature costs a number of budget points equal to its encounter value (
ev:). When choosing creatures, try to choose a variety of roles for a more dynamic combat experience. CONSIDER CREATURE LEVEL To ensure an encounter is challenging but not devastating for the players, you want to choose creatures whose level is no more than 2 greater than the heroes’ level. For instance, creatures of level 7 and below are appropriate challenges for a party of 5th-level heroes. If the heroes have 6 or more Victories, you can push the upper limit to within 3 levels of the heroes. Some creatures outside of this level range might fall into your 
ev: budget, but these creatures have the potential to deal devastating damage before a hero gets to do anything about it. That means players could die after relatively few strikes or abilities from such a creature and that the creature’s potencies may be nearly impossible to resist. It won’t feel very heroic. This is really the only indicator that level serves in encounter building. Everything else relies on 
ev: and organization. MINIONS COME IN GROUPS OF EIGHT Whenever you spend 
ev: to buy minions for a combat encounter, you buy them eight at a time. There’s no point in buying fewer minions than this for an encounter, as they won’t be very effective. NUMBER OF CREATURES Too many creatures or too many different stat blocks in an encounter can create a big cognitive load for you and turn exciting encounters into slogs. In general, you don’t want more than eight creatures per hero at a time in an encounter. If the encounter has more than three creatures per hero, at least half the creatures in that encounter should be minions. When it comes to number of stat blocks, you generally don’t want to use more than six different kinds of stat blocks in an encounter, though you can probably manage more if you’re using a lot of simple minion stat blocks. If you’re just starting out as a Director, keep the variety small until you’re confident in your ability to run a complex combat encounter. STAR OF THE SHOW Sometimes a combat encounter features a creature that you want to stick around for more than a round of combat and leave a lasting impression on the heroes. These are typically the named villains who the heroes face in the climax of an adventure or campaign. If you want a creature to stick around and leave a lasting impression in a combat encounter, make it a hard encounter and choose a leader or solo creature with an 
ev: that is at least one third of the encounter budget to be the star of the show. DYNAMIC TERRAIN OBJECTS The end of this book features dynamic terrain objects. You can spend your 
ev: budget on these objects the same way you do on monsters. Adding one or two to an encounter gives the heroes a challenge to overcome that is something over than another creature. See Dynamic Terrain for more information. STEP 5: BUILD INITIATIVE GROUPS Once you have your creatures selected, you’ll put them together in initiative groups, with all creatures in the same initiative group acting on the same turn. Though it’s not a hard and fast rule, you can keep the following guideline in mind as you build initiative groups: The total 
ev: of an initiative group should be between the encounter worth of one to two heroes (see Step 2 above). This helps to ensure that each encounter group can hold its own against any hero in the party without overwhelming that character. It’s okay to have one group with a total 
ev: less than that. It’s also okay for a group to be worth more than two heroes, as long as that group consists of a single creature or the heroes have racked up a lot of Victories. HOW MANY INITIATIVE GROUPS? In a battle without a solo creature, you generally want about as many initiative groups as there are heroes plus or minus two. This gives you a healthy range to play with and makes your turns effective without being overwhelming for the heroes. PARTIES LARGE AND SMALL This game was made and tested with groups of mainly three to six heroes, including retainers, since that’s how most folks will play the game. If your group is smaller or larger than that, don’t panic! You can still have a lot of fun, but you’ll want to keep the following guidelines in mind: • If a group has seven or more heroes, you’ll find that solo creatures don’t quite live up to their name. It’s okay to give the solo creatures some lackeys to help them challenge the heroes. • If a group has three or fewer heroes, consider giving them some retainers to make up for the difference. Parties with three or fewer heroes can struggle against solo creatures and big groups of minions, given how much damage they have to spread around each turn. QUICK ENCOUNTER BUILDING If you want to build an encounter quickly without doing a lot of math, good news! We’ve got a formula or two you can use to build an encounter quickly after you determine an encounter’s difficulty. After going through this process, you can build initiative groups. STEP 1. PARTY SIZE, LEVEL, AND VICTORIES What level are the heroes? How many heroes are there? Write down the answers. You’ll need that later. How many Victories do they have (if they have different amounts take the average)? For every two they have, add another hero to the party for the purpose of this method of encounter building. STEP 2. BUY CREATURES TO FILL HERO SLOTS Your encounter has a number of hero slots equal to the number of heroes in the party you calculated in step 1. Here’s how many creatures can fill a hero slot • Eight minions • Two band creatures • One platoon creature • One leader or troop fills two hero slots • One solo fills five hero slots plus one slot for each level they are higher than the heroes You’ll want to fill hero slots according to encounter difficulty: • For a trivial encounter, use only creatures of the hero’s level or lower and leave at least two slots empty. • For an easy encounter, use creatures of the hero’s level or 1 higher and leave one slot empty. • For a standard encounter, use creatures of the hero’s level or 1 higher. Fill all slots, and you can give yourself an extra slot to fill if none of the creatures have a level higher than the heroes. • For a hard encounter, use creatures of the hero’s level and up to 2 higher. Fill all slots plus at least another one and up to another three. If all the creatures are higher level than the heroes, don’t give yourself more than two extra slots. • For an extreme encounter, fill all slots with creatures of the heroes level or higher plus another four or more slots. USING CREATURE ROLES Creature roles help you build interesting encounters with varied challenges. While including every role in a combat encounter makes the battle too complicated for most groups, a fight with creatures who are all the same role typically leads to dull, grindy combat—and few players (or Directors) enjoy combat where both sides are just standing still and rolling to hit without anything dynamic or dramatic happening. For instance, an encounter with a controller, two defenders, and two harriers is more interesting and fun than an encounter with five harriers. AMBUSHER CREATURES Ambusher creatures can hide, turn invisible, or otherwise find ways to get the drop of their enemies. They typically spend half their turn attacking a hero, and the other half slipping away and hiding. They focus on taking down a single hero, sometimes dragging their target into the place where they hide. Encounters that include ambushers should have plenty of cover or concealment, giving them places to hide. Adding other creatures—typically brutes, defenders, harriers, minions—keeps other heroes busy while the ambusher focuses on taking down a single target. ARTILLERY CREATURES Artillery creatures are great at ranged combat and can damage heroes who typically hang back behind beefier counterparts. Most artillery creatures are weak in melee, so add some brutes, minions, or soldiers for them to hide behind during combat. On their turn in combat, an artillery creature typically tries to move away from nearby foes and put a brute, defender, or other ally between themself and the threat, then attacks that enemy. If forced into melee, most artillery creatures do whatever they can to get away, including turning their action into a move action to flee further. If no enemies are closing in, artillery creatures move to keep the heroes at the edge of their range and often attack the biggest threat to their allies first. BRUTE CREATURES Brute creatures hit hard and have a lot of 
stamina:. Their damage output can’t be ignored, so heroes often focus on taking down brutes instead of other creatures who have fewer hit points or are weaker in melee. Brutes need to get up close to perform their most devastating attacks, so they work best on smaller battlefields. On their turn in combat, brutes move toward the closest group of enemies and attack, preferring to engage multiple foes at once. Brutes tend to be simpler to run than other creatures, so you can include a lot of them in an encounter. CONTROLLER CREATURES With their ability to hamper and move heroes, controllers make a dynamic addition to any battle. They tend to have more complicated actions and traits with unique effects, so most combat encounters shouldn’t have more than two controllers. Many controllers work best when they have brutes, defenders, harriers, and minions protecting them and taking advantage of the effects, they create. Controllers often use their biggest and most powerful effects at the start of an encounter, affecting as many foes as possible. If the controller can’t affect multiple characters or use their most powerful feature, they focus on manipulating the battlefield and repositioning so they can use that feature on their next turn. DEFENDER CREATURES Defender creatures defend their allies by drawing the heroes’ attacks. They make excellent protectors for ambushers, artillery creatures, controllers, leaders, and support creatures. Defenders don’t need to stay very close to the creatures they protect—and it’s better if they don’t. A defender who breaks away from their charge can lock down a threat far from the rest of the fight. During combat, defenders engage characters who are strong in melee. A defender battles as many foes as they can reach so their allies can freely move. If more than one defender is in a battle, they typically split up, each fighting a different hero. HARRIER CREATURES Harrier creatures make battles dynamic. They can move to attack vulnerable heroes who are weaker in melee, then retreat (if they can do so safely) to protect their artillery, controller, leader, and support allies. Since they can outrun and outmaneuver heroes, this forces the heroes to act tactically. Harriers pair well with each other creature role, including other harriers. HEXER CREATURES Like controllers, hexers tend to be a little more complicated and squishy. One or two with a lot of protection from allies can make for a fun encounter. Hexers like to hamper other creatures and target the foes they think are most-likely to succumb to their debuffs. If a hero has a great turn cutting down the hexer’s allies, odds are they’re the person the hexer wants to stop next time there’s a chance. LEADER AND SUPPORT CREATURES Leader creatures have villain actions (see Villain Actions) and fight best alongside allies. Support creatures function much like leaders, but they lack villain actions and are less complex. Leader and support creatures can buff and heal their allies and grant allies extra movement and actions. As long as a leader or support creature stays in the fight, their allies are enhanced. They are most effective when protected by and buffing artillery, brutes, defenders, harriers, and minions. You typically shouldn’t use more than one leader or support creature in an encounter, as their overlapping enhancements can turn a seemingly normal encounter into a fatal one. Leaders and support creatures remain close to their allies so their features can benefit as many creatures as possible. MINION CREATURES As discussed in the Minions section, minions allow you to create cinematic battles where the characters feel heroic as they cut through several foes at a time. Using minions of a level within 2 of the characters’ average level also keeps them dangerous and relevant. When minions work together, they can’t be ignored, as they deal a lot of damage and can lock down the characters. Minions make decent protectors for ambushers, artillery, controllers, and leaders. MOUNT CREATURES Mount creatures are good for carrying other creatures into battle. Mounts of size: 2 and smaller are typically meant to carry a single rider into combat, while larger mounts are built to carry more creatures. Adding mounts to combat encounters make the creatures riding them much faster. They pair well with artillery, brutes, controllers, hexers, leaders, and support creatures. You can also use mounts without riders as harriers in combat. SOLO CREATURES Solo creatures have villain actions and are an encounter all on their own for a group of four to six heroes. Their villain actions and lair actions allow them to hamper and harm foes outside of the normal turn order. They’re encountered alone and fight most effectively in environments with plenty of space to move around and find cover. Solo creatures use every movement advantage they have, burrowing, climbing, flying, swimming, or teleporting around the battlefield on their turn. They focus on the hero threatening them most, but also position themselves to target as many foes as possible with their area abilities. CHOOSING A MAP To get the most out of the rules for movement, difficult terrain, and falling, you should use encounter maps with interesting environmental features. You might have ledges, columns, walls, windows, dynamic terrain objects, and the like for creatures to be thrown into, thrown off of, or thrown through (and use for cover). You’ll want most of your battles to take place in environments with plenty of space to move around, avoiding a lot of long corridors that are only 1 square wide. You don’t have to be a master artist to create a great tactical map. You can use hand-drawn shapes and lines on an erasable mat (or virtual tabletop) to represent cliffs, hazards, and more. You can also find incredible maps online. Some are free and others are available for a reasonable price on the websites of great cartographers. ENCOUNTER OBJECTIVES You can use objectives to create encounters that are about more than hacking down your foes to get to the last bit of 
stamina:. The Combat chapter in Heroes gives an overview of different combat objectives you can set for heroes to achieve during an encounter. While that book gives an overview of what’s achievable in each objective so that players know what’s expected of them, this book gives more detailed examples that you can use and modify for your games. The write up of these objectives in this book includes the following details: • Difficulty Modifier: This tells you how the objective changes the encounter’s difficulty. Pay attention to how objectives change the difficulty of an encounter. You might be able to turn up the head a bit! • Success Condition: This tells you what the heroes must do to win the day. When these conditions are met, the heroes’ enemies flee or surrender, or you can also utilize the Dramatic Finish or Event Ending described in the Combat chapter of Heroes. • Victories: This tells you how many Victories the heroes earn. • Failure Condition: This tells you when the heroes have failed and the enemies win. If this occurs, the heroes earn no Victories. Let’s get into a more detailed look at each of the objectives from Heroes. DIMINISH NUMBERS The simplest combat encounter objective is “defeat them before they defeat us.” While the heroes don’t have to kill every last enemy in a Diminish Numbers encounter, they do need to remove their opponents to win the day and get their opponents to a point where they flee or surrender. DIFFICULTY MODIFIER This objective doesn’t modify the encounter’s difficulty. SUCCESS CONDITION Choose one of the following success conditions: • An encounter that includes at least two groups of minions ends when the heroes have no nonminion enemies remaining. • An encounter with mostly band creatures ends when the heroes outnumber their foes. • An encounter with most platoon creatures ends when the heroes outnumber their foes two to one. • The encounter ends when the number of the heroes’ remaining foes is half or fewer what it was at the start. • In a battle against a solo creature, the creature flees or surrenders when reduced to a quarter of their 
stamina: or less and after using all their villain actions. VICTORIES If the heroes achieve success, they gain 1 Victory for an easy or standard encounter, or 2 Victories for a hard or extreme encounter. FAILURE CONDITION The heroes gain no Victories if they are killed, captured, flee, or otherwise fail to defeat their foes. MAKING OBJECTIVES KNOWN Encounters work best if the players have a good idea of what they are working toward. You don’t need to state objectives outright to the players at the start of the battle, though you can if they like. Not all groups want to start combat with the Director saying, “Your objectives are to break the eldritch machine and destroy the vampire lord,” because doing so might take the players out of the game’s narrative. In many combat encounters, the objectives are obvious. For instance, in a battle against a necromancer controlling a horde of undead minions, the players probably don’t need to be told that defeating the necromancer ends the encounter when that’s an easy assumption. In an encounter against cultists performing a world-ending ritual, the heroes can guess that stopping the ritual is one of their objectives. In fact, they probably went on this adventure to specifically achieve that objective. They’re not there for karaoke at the end of existence! Not all objectives are so clear, however. In a battle against a goblin cursespitter, a kobold legionary, and three human knaves guarding the entrance to a bandit fortress, it can be difficult to know what the exact objective of the encounter is, beyond “Defeat them all!” The objective could be to simply diminish the enemy forces, but it could also be the case that the cursespitter leads the group, so that defeating the goblin causes the other forces to fall apart. In such a case, it helps if the Director provides at least a hint of that setup at the start of the battle. The cursespitter could clearly issue orders and even call the other bandits cowards, demanding that they not “run away like last time!” DEFEAT A SPECIFIC FOE A Defeat a Specific Foe encounter includes one or more of the heroes’ enemies commanding the rest, such as a hobgoblin bloodlord leading a group of mercenaries, or one or more particularly powerful foes among a group of weaker ones, such as a pair of tusker demons in a gnoll war band. Because these enemies are the stars of the encounter, if only weak foes are left once the stars are gone, the battle loses its challenge and it’s time to wrap it up. It makes sense that those weaker foes flee or surrender once their biggest advantage has gone down. DIFFICULTY MODIFIER If the creature or creatures who need to be taken down for the encounter to end makes up one third or less of the opposing side’s total 
ev:, then the encounter is one step of difficulty easier (e.g. from hard to standard). SUCCESS CONDITION The heroes win when the designated creature or creatures are reduced to 0 
stamina:. VICTORIES The heroes gain Victories according to the encounter’s difficulty after being adjusted for this objective. They earn 1 Victory for an easy or standard encounter or 2 for a hard encounter. FAILURE CONDITION The heroes gain no Victories if they don’t defeat all the designated creatures. Note that designated creatures could choose to flee if all their allies start dying. FLEEING FOES When the heroes meet objective success conditions, many enemies head know it’s time to flee. It’s a bad idea to make a habit of having enemies who get away come back with reinforcements to punish the heroes. If you do this, the players will learn to make every combat a slog to the bitter end. Most would rather see every enemy go down than let one get away and come back stronger. Make it clear that if someone is fleeing an encounter, it’s because they don’t want to face the heroes again. If you do plan to have a kobold gather reinforcements, make that little dragon swear vengeance and yell for help as they flee, so the heroes know that kobold in particular and not every other fleeing baddy is a problem. GET THE THING! Classic heroic fantasy is full of important objects that the heroes must protect from the forces of evil: magic rings, royal birth certificates, dragon eggs, and the like. Heroes often find themselves at violent odds with their enemies as they race to collect a valuable or important item from a guarded temple or castle, or when they need to steal the item from a group of enemies already in possession of it. Objectives in this category work well when paired with other objectives, such as Defeat a Specific Foe. For instance, the heroes must steal a ledger containing a record of criminal activity from an overmind and her lackeys. However, even if they obtain the ledger, the battle won’t be over until they also defeat the overmind, who won’t let the book go without a fight! THE THING The thing the heroes need to get is typically a 1T object. (If the thing is a creature or a bulky object that must be carried past enemies, this might instead be an Escort encounter!) Most or all approach routes to the thing are guarded by enemies, and often a trap or a particularly powerful monster stands guard over the object. The thing might be fragile (like a document) or virtually unbreakable (like a magic weapon), but in any case, the enemies don’t particularly want to harm it. However, in some cases it can be damaged accidentally. Additionally, a thing can have one of the following extra defenses: • Hidden: The heroes may need to make one or more successful tests to find the thing, or it may be behind a door or lid that must be opened. It might even be hidden in plain sight. The unassuming sword in an inanimate suit of armor’s hand is really the magic sword they need! • Held: The thing is possessed by an enemy. Perhaps it’s in their pocket or, if the thing is a weapon or implement, the enemy might be using it. DIFFICULTY MODIFIER If there is no powerful monster (at least one-third or more of the encounter’s total 
ev:) or trap directly guarding the thing, the encounter is one step easier. If the thing is hidden or held, the encounter is one stage harder. SUCCESS CONDITION The heroes win when all the heroes leave the encounter map with the thing. VICTORIES The heroes gain 1 Victory if they leave the map with the thing and the encounter was easy, standard, or hard after being adjusted for this objective. They instead earn 2 Victories if the success condition is met and the encounter’s difficulty is Extreme or none of the heroes take damage during the encounter. FAILURE CONDITION The heroes gain no Victories if the thing is destroyed or remains in the enemies’ hands. DESTROY THE THING! Combat doesn’t always have to be about destroying your enemies. Sometimes it’s about destroying their stuff! Burning a pirate captain’s vessel, closing a portal to the Abyssal Wasteland before it lets in an army of demons, or shutting down a massive kobold trap made of spinning blades could so hamper the heroes’ foes that the battle is no longer worth fighting once the damage is done. Sometimes the thing is actually multiple things, all of which must be destroyed. THE THING A typical thing is an object with 
stamina: equal to the heroes’ level times 20. Most objects have poison and psychic immunity. Additionally, the thing may have immunities or vulnerabilities to one or more damage types, for instance, a magic statue might be immune to fire damage but vulnerable to thunder damage. Additionally, a thing can have one or more of the following extra defenses: • Hidden: The heroes may need to make one or more successful tests to find the thing, or it may be behind a door or lid that must be opened. It might even be hidden in plain sight. • Held: The thing is possessed by an enemy. A thing can’t be both hidden and held. • Sturdy: The thing’s 
stamina: is twice what it was. • Multiple: There are multiple things, all of which must be destroyed. Divide the thing’s 
stamina: between all of them. DIFFICULTY MODIFIER If the thing doesn’t have any extra defenses, the encounter is one step easier. If the thing has at least two extra defenses, the encounter is one stage harder. SUCCESS CONDITION The heroes win when they destroy the thing. VICTORIES The heroes gain Victories according to the encounter’s difficulty after being adjusted for this objective. They earn 1 Victory for an easy or standard encounter or 2 for a hard encounter. FAILURE CONDITION The heroes gain no Victories if the thing is not destroyed and remains in the enemies’ hands. SAVE ANOTHER No one earns the mantle of hero without saving a few lives. Sometimes the point of an encounter isn’t to kill, but to save as many folks as you can. If the heroes rescue powerful allies from the clutches of their foes during combat, the added strength of those allies might be enough to make the remainder of the encounter trivial. When you and your companions save a griffon from a crew of poachers, the hunters become the … well, you know the rest. ALLIES AND POTENTIAL ALLIES Some Save Another encounters feature willing allies (creatures that are able and willing to fight alongside the heroes), and some feature potential allies (creatures that can’t or won’t join the heroes right away—but might later in the battle). In combat, willing allies can be controlled by the heroes (and might use retainer stat blocks), while potential allies are controlled by the Director. During an encounter, potential allies must be won over and freed from captivity before they become allies. This requires success on a hard 
Presence test made as a maneuver. Potential allies otherwise flee for the nearest exit on their turns. DIFFICULTY MODIFIER For each willing ally the heroes can save who is of their level or higher, add one hero to the party for the purposes of building your encounter. SUCCESS CONDITION Once all allies are freed and have either joined the fight or retreated off the encounter map, and at least half of the allies lived through the encounter, the heroes win. VICTORIES The heroes gain 1 Victory if the success condition was met and encounter was easy or standard after being adjusted by the objective’s difficulty modifier. The heroes gain 2 Victories if the success condition is met and the combat encounter was hard or extreme or all of the allies were saved and survived. FAILURE CONDITION The heroes gain no Victories if half or more of the allies are dead or captured. ESCORT Surprising as it may seem, sometimes the fate of the mission doesn’t rest on the heroes’ shoulders at all! Sometimes it rests on the shoulders of someone standing next to the heroes. The heroes’ job is to keep this important person safe as they travel to a specific destination. Not every Escort encounter is on behalf of a wise or mighty ally. Sometimes the heroes are tasked with protecting a helpless or even an actively troublesome creature, such as a hapless noble or a wayward child. They might even have to protect a bulky or inconvenient inanimate object. Whatever the case, the enemies just keep coming until the heroes get their charge to their destination. WARD The creature or object to be protected is called the ward. At the start of each round, choose a hero. The ward moves on that hero’s turn and is controlled by that hero. Most wards can take a move action or a maneuver on their turn, but not both. A ward’s characteristics and speed are determined by the Director. Most humanoid wards have a speed of 5. A sturdy ward, such as an able-bodied citizen, typically has 
stamina: equal to 10 times the heroes’ level. A delicate ward, such as an elderly diplomat or an important object, typically has 
stamina: equal to 5 times the heroes’ level. DESTINATION Every Escort encounter has a destination: a place of safety beyond which the enemies won’t follow. Typically, when the encounter begins, the ward’s distance from the destination is at least three times the ward’s 
speed: (though they can start closer if difficult terrain or other obstacles complicate the route). The heroes’ enemies can be placed anywhere on the encounter map, including between the ward and the destination, but not within 5 squares of the destination. REINFORCEMENTS At the start of each round, any minion that was killed during the last round is replaced by a reinforcement. The Director chooses their position, which can’t be within 5 squares of the ward, the destination, or any hero. DIFFICULTY MODIFIER A combat encounter’s difficulty is one stage harder with a delicate ward. SUCCESS CONDITION The heroes win when the ward reaches their destination. VICTORIES The heroes gain 1 Victory if the success condition is met. They earn 2 Victories if the success condition is met and the combat encounter’s difficulty is extreme after being adjusted for this objective or the ward and all heroes reach their destination in fewer than 3 rounds. FAILURE CONDITION If the ward is reduced to 0 
stamina: or is prevented from reaching their destination, the heroes gain no Victories. HOLD THEM OFF Sometimes the heroes just need to buy time. They might need to battle a conquering tyrant’s army to allow innocent villagers time to escape. They might need to hold off wave after wave of zombies while a group of priests completes a ritual to lay the undead to rest for good. To achieve this objective, the heroes need to stay alive and protect a particular position for a number of rounds determined by the Director. DEFENSIVE POSITION The Director (or the heroes) choose a defensive position, an area that must be held and controlled by the heroes. The fewer of the heroes’ enemies that get passed the defensive position, the better their chances of success. The area can be any size:. The defensive position blocks entry to a vulnerable area the heroes are defending. Often, a defensive position grants bonuses to its defenders. The approach to the position might be narrow, over difficult terrain, or require climbing, or anyone inside the position might have the benefit of higher ground against anyone outside it. ENCOUNTER DURATION The Director determines the encounter duration, the number of rounds that the heroes must defend the area in order to be successful. A typical encounter duration is 3 rounds. REINFORCEMENTS At the end of each round, the Director adds more enemies for the heroes to battle on the map. The new group should have an 
ev: of all the enemies killed during that round plus the 
ev: value of one hero (see Encounter Building). If the Director doesn’t spend all of their 
ev: in a round, the remainder can be added to a future round. Reinforcements appear at least 10 squares from the defensive position. DIFFICULTY MODIFIER A Hold Them Off encounter’s difficulty is determined by the creatures present for the battle at the beginning of the first round of combat. Don’t count reinforcements toward the difficulty. The encounter difficulty is one step harder if the encounter duration is 5 rounds or greater. SUCCESS CONDITION The heroes win if they survive for the encounter duration and let fewer creatures through the defensive position than there are heroes. VICTORIES The heroes gain 1 Victory if the success condition is met. They earn 2 Victories if the success condition is met and the combat encounter’s difficulty is extreme or the heroes hold off the enemy for an encounter duration of 5 rounds or more. FAILURE CONDITION The heroes earn now Victories if a number of creatures equal to or greater than their number get passed the defensive position. ASSAULT THE DEFENSES The enemy holds a strategically important position and the heroes want it. In a reverse of the Hold Them Off encounter, the heroes seize the enemy’s defensive position. The encounter ends when the heroes secure this spot for themselves. Those enemies likely know better than to assault that position on a whim, because they just held it! Sometimes, and Assault the Defenses encounter is part of a combined objective. First you’ve got to assault the defenses, then you’ve got to hold off against counterattack. DEFENSIVE POSITION The Director choose a defensive position, an area that must be captured by the heroes. The area can be any size:. Not all of the heroes’ enemies in the encounter are in this position, as some are outside attempting to stop heroes before they get close. Often, a defensive position grants bonuses to its defenders. The approach to the position might be narrow, over difficult terrain, or require climbing, or anyone inside the position might have the benefit of higher ground against anyone outside it. DIFFICULTY MODIFIER An Assault the Defenses encounter’s difficulty is one stage harder if the defensive position grants two or more bonuses to its defenders. SUCCESS CONDITION The heroes win when at least one hero and none of their enemies have been in the defensive position for four consecutive turns. VICTORIES The heroes gain 1 Victory if the success condition is met, or 2 Victories if the success condition is met and encounter’s difficulty is hard or extreme after being adjusted by the objective. FAILURE CONDITION The heroes only fail if they are unable to achieve the success condition. STOP THE ACTION Sometimes combat is complicated by the fact that the heroes need to stop the villainous actions of their foes. It’s not enough to simply defeat the warriors in a cult. The heroes must also stop the zealots’ archdevil-summoning ritual! Or it might be that the heroes need to interrupt a wedding and make sure an evil mage doesn’t marry the heir to the throne. Despite combat, the mage forces the ceremony to continue! Objectives in this category often have a timer associated with them. If the heroes don’t achieve the objective in a certain number of rounds, the conditions of the battle often change. For instance, if the cultists summon the archdevil, defeating the devil suddenly becomes the heroes’ new objective! ENCOUNTER DURATION The Director determines the encounter duration, the number of rounds before the villains complete their plans. A typical encounter duration is 3 rounds. Sometimes, events can change the encounter duration Succeeding on a hard 
Reason test to dispute the wedding’s legality increases the encounter duration by 1, or allowing zealots to sacrifice an innocent creature as part of their ritual decreases it by 1. STOPPING THE ACTION The villain’s evil plan has certain requirements, and if those requirements aren’t met, the action is stopped and the heroes are victorious. For instance, to complete a ritual, during each round at least one zealot priest might be required to spend an action to further the ritual. A wedding can’t be completed if a participant or the officiant is killed or captured. FAILURE CONSEQUENCES If the villains’ plan succeeds, there may be additional consequences within the encounter. For instance, if the zealots summon a demon, or if a newly-crowned evil mage uses their new royal authority to summon guards, the heroes may face extra enemies. These potential reinforcements aren’t counted towards the encounter’s difficulty, since they only appear once the heroes have failed the encounter. This is an entirely new battle now! DIFFICULTY MODIFIER A Stop the Action encounter’s difficulty is one step harder if the encounter duration is 2 or less, and one Step easier if the action can be stopped by killing or removing any single creature. SUCCESS CONDITION The heroes win if they stop the action before the encounter duration is up. VICTORIES The heroes gain 1 Victory if the success condition is met, or 2 Victories if the success condition is met and the combat encounter’s difficulty is extreme or the heroes stop the action before the last round of the encounter duration. FAILURE CONDITION The heroes gain no Victories if they fail to stop the action before the end of the encounter duration. The heroes may earn Victories from any new encounters that occur because of a failure consequence. COMPLETE THE ACTION The opposite of a Stop the Action encounter, this objective ending sees the characters charged with initiating an event, performing a ritual, and so forth. For instance, if the heroes are attempting to launch an airship while repelling a time raider boarding party, the encounter could be over the moment the heroes manage to activate the vessel and take off with just a few time raiders actually aboard. ENCOUNTER DURATION The Director determines the encounter duration, the number of rounds before the heroes can complete their plans. A typical encounter duration is 3 rounds. TASKS AND FAILURES During each round, at least half the heroes must spend a maneuver performing a task that advances their plans. Each round, the Director decides what tasks are available and where they must be performed. For instance, to launch an airship, one hero might have to cast off an anchor on deck while another unfurls a sail at the top of a mast. The list of available tasks may change each turn. If at the end of a round the heroes have failed to perform the required number of tasks, the party accumulates one failure. For more difficult encounters, performing a task may require a successful test. DIFFICULTY MODIFIER A Complete the Action encounter’s difficulty is one step harder if the encounter duration is 5 or more, or if completing tasks requires a successful test. It is one step easier if the encounter duration is 2 or less. SUCCESS CONDITION The heroes win if they reach the end of the encounter duration with 1 or 0 failures. VICTORIES The heroes gain 1 Victory if the success condition is met or 2 Victories if the success condition is met and the combat encounter’s difficulty is extreme after being modified by this objective or the heroes reach the end of the encounter duration with zero failures. FAILURE CONDITION The heroes gain no Victories and the can’t complete the action if they accumulate 2 or more failures during the encounter duration. RUNNING ENCOUNTERS Once you’ve built a combat encounter, it’s time to run it! Here’s a few tips to help you run fun and dynamic encounters: • The monster stat blocks in Draw Steel are designed to be run as they’re written. Most of the time if you take the actions and maneuvers in a creature’s stat block, they’ll be effective. • If a non-minion creature doesn’t have a maneuver in their stat block, remember that they can take the Grab, Hide, and Knockback maneuvers just like the heroes can! • Keep creatures moving! The heroes will move in response to the monsters moving. If you want a dynamic combat, move your creatures to take advantage of flanking, get out of range of the heroes, and to attack vulnerable targets. • Spread the damage around. If you’ve got an encounter with a lot of creatures, it’s tempting to focus fire on a single hero. This can be a good tactical move, but it’s not always fun for the players. Many heroes have triggered actions they get to use when they take damage, so spreading the damage around is giving them a chance to do a cool thing off turn. • You can modify creature 
stamina: as you see fit. Do you really want that foe to live for one more turn? Give them a little extra 
stamina:! Is combat starting to drag? Look at that, every creature you control now has just 1 
stamina: remaining. • You can also utilize reinforcements. It can be tough to manage a lot of creatures at once on a battlefield, but bringing in new waves of creatures allows you to have a lot of different stat blocks in an encounter without getting overwhelmed by trying to run all of them at once. Reinforcements can also make an encounter that seems like a cakewalk suddenly much more deadly and raise the stakes! • You can end combat with a dramatic finish, which lets the heroes get in on the narrative fun, or an event ending. • If the heroes decide to flee, you can have them escape in a montage test or simply describe them running away to live to fight another day—whatever you think will be the most fun for the players after a defeat. LAST-STAND 
stamina: For players who like to always duke it out to the bitter end rather than ending combat early, you can use this optional rule to help bring things to a quicker conclusion. When it’s clear that the heroes are going to win a battle, their enemies are overcome with fear, despair, and panic. In this weakened state, each enemy’s 
stamina: drops to 1, and each minion has a damage threshold of 1. The heroes can then make short work of any remaining foes, getting the satisfaction of total annihilation via dice rolls. RESKINNING MONSTERS Even with a book chock full of monsters, you’re likely to wish you had stat blocks for a specific kind of creature that isn’t in this book (or another supplement we or a third party puts out). You might need snake people, fish people, or a fifty-story-tall crab. The good news is that you can modify all of the stat blocks in this book to make new creatures with a little work! Here’s some tips for reskinning monsters for you: • You can change any creature’s description and still use the numbers in their stat block and create something new. If you want a weretiger instead of a werewolf, odds are just describing the werewolf as a tiger-humanoid hybrid and changing the word “wolf” with “tiger” everywhere it appears will get you what you need without changing much of anything else. If you find the existing creature that is closest to what you want, your job is a lot easier. • Adding or removing the Climb or Swim keyword to a stat block and giving a creature the ability to breathe underwater doesn’t change their level or challenge. You can do these things freely to create new climbing and aquatic variants of different stat blocks. Turn those demonic gnolls into rampaging fishfolk! • You can swap damage types, immunities, and weaknesses easily. You can make the elemental crux of fire into a crux of acid by changing all the fire damage in the stat block to acid damage. • The stat blocks in the Animals and Rivals sections are meant to be modified and have rules for creating new animal and humanoid stat blocks. You can use these to create nearly anything that falls into either of those categories (including many fantasy animals). RETAINERS A retainer is a type of follower who fights alongside the heroes. A retainer can gain levels just as heroes do, so their battlefield contributions remain relevant as the heroes advance. Retainers have stat blocks similar to monsters. This book provides more than a dozen retainers. In addition, these rules allow you to create your own retainer using nearly any monster as a base creature. Some retainers, like the human warrior or the time raider mind healer, are members of playable ancestries; others, like the minotaur gorer, are more monstrous in nature. A retainer is a follower of a specific hero. This hero is called the retainer’s mentor, and the hero’s player controls that retainer in battle. Each player can control only one retainer at once. If a hero acquires more than one retainer, all but one are considered to be waiting at the party’s stronghold or at the periphery of battle, not contributing meaningfully to its outcome. SIDEKICKS, NOT STARS Retainers are useful allies, but the heroes are the stars of the show! Retainers are there to pitch in and to make the heroes look good. Retainers are simpler to run than heroes. They have fewer abilities and fewer resources to manage. Usually, a retainer makes about one power roll per turn and then gets out of the way. But while a retainer’s turn is quick, it can be tactically interesting! Often, besides dealing damage, a retainer’s abilities allow their mentors to do interesting things on their turn. GAINING RETAINERS In many cases, heroes gain retainers as they acquire character features. For instance, a hero might gain a retainer from a title, a complication, or a similar game element. When a player gains Renown, they may be able to choose a retainer as a new follower. At other times, the events of the story may dictate that a retainer joins the party. When the heroes rescue a prisoner or befriend a former rival, the Director may decide that the NPC joins the party, becoming a retainer of one of the characters. Gaining a retainer is always at the Director’s discretion. If a rules element grants a specific retainer, the Director can always substitute another that works better for their campaign. RETAINERS LEAVING THE PARTY A retainer doesn’t always travel with the party; when they’re not called on to adventure, they can remain behind at the party’s stronghold or otherwise live their own lives. Even when they’re not present, they’re still considered to be a retainer of the party. But there might be cases when a retainer does permanently leave. Retainers aren’t invulnerable—they can be killed in battle. Retainers can leave under less extreme circumstances as well. If the events of an adventure set a retainer against their former mentor, or if the retainer’s story naturally comes to an end, the party and the Director can decide that it’s time for the retainer to ride off into the sunset. The players may meet their former adventuring buddy again, perhaps as a friendly NPC or even as a foe! RETAINERS IN COMBAT There are some special rules to keep in mind while using a retainer in combat. Part of the mentor’s turn. The retainer takes their turn as part of their mentor’s turn. For the purposes of (EoT) effects or other rules elements that depend on the start or end of a creature’s turn, the start of the mentor’s turn is considered to be the start of the retainer’s turn and the end of the mentor’s turn is considered to be the end of the retainer’s turn. If a hero can’t act on their turn (for instance they are unconscious), their player can still control their retainer. Retainer Action Economy. On their turn, the retainer can take only a move action and an action, a move action and a maneuver, or two move actions. Recoveries. A retainer has 6 Recoveries. Surges. When a retainer gains surges, they go to their mentor’s surge pool, which the retainer shares. The retainer spends surges the same way a hero can, but the extra damage granted to them by surges is equal to their mentor’s highest characteristic score. RETAINER ADVANCEMENT Some monsters have the Retainer type next to their level and role: for instance a goblin guide is a level 1 harrier retainer. These retainers can gain levels alongside the party. A lowly level 1 goblin guide can advance up to level 10, provided they adventure with a heroic party for long enough! A retainer doesn’t gain Victories or XP. Instead, a retainer usually has the same level as their mentor. When a character acquires a retainer, the retainer levels up to their mentor’s level. Thereafter, each time a mentor gains a level, all of their retainers attain the same level (whether they are currently accompanying the hero or not). If a character somehow acquires a retainer with a level higher than their own, the retainer doesn’t lose levels—but they don’t gain any new levels until their mentor’s level exceeds their own. ADVANCEMENT FEATURES A retainer monster has a stat block much like that of other monsters, which includes characteristics, a level, a role, one or more abilities including a signature action, and other standard monster features. This stat block represents the monster’s statistics at their lowest level. The monster’s statistics improve as they gain levels, as shown on the Retainer Advancement table. Depending on a retainer’s starting level, they may be able to gain more or fewer levels. A voiceless talker exile, which starts at level 6, can only gain four levels before reaching level 10! If the level listed in a monster’s stat block is higher than 1, they don’t gain advancement benefits for any levels up to and including their starting level; as a high level monster, similar bonuses are already baked into their statistics. Retainer Advancement Leve l Advancement Feature 
stamina: Increas e Signatur e Action Damage Increase (Tier 1) Signatur e Action Damage Increase (Tier 2 and 3) 2 +1 to one characteristic +10 +1 +1 3 +2 free strike damage +10 +1 4 Level 4 retainer advancement ability or level 4 role advancement ability +10 +1 +1 5 +1 to all characteristic s +10 +1 6 +2 free strike damage +10 +1 +1 7 Level 7 retainer advancement ability or level 7 role advancement ability +10 +1 8 +1 to one characteristic +10 +1 +1 9 +2 free strike damage +10 +1 10 Level 10 retainer advancement ability or level 10 role advancement ability +10 +1 +1 Characteristic Increase: At level 2, a retainer gains a permanent +1 bonus to one of their characteristics. At level 5, they gain an additional +1 to all their characteristics, and at level 8 they gain an additional +1 to one characteristic. 
free_strike: Damage: The damage from the retainer’s free strikes increases by +2 at level 3, again at level 6, and again at level 9, to a maximum of +6. Advancement Abilities: A retainer gains new abilities at levels 4, 7, and 10 (unless the retainer’s starting level is that high or higher). If a monster has the Retainer type, their stat block includes new retainer advancement abilities, specific to that monster, for each level on which they qualify for a new advancement ability. Whenever a monster would gain a new advancement ability, instead of choosing the retainer ability in their stat block they can choose a role advancement ability that matches the monster’s role and level. Advancement abilities for each role are given in the next section. 
stamina: Increase: At each level, a retainer’s 
stamina: increases by 10. Signature Action Damage Increase: A retainer’s signature action is unique in that it gets stronger as the retainer advances in level. Only their signature action improves in this way! Each retainer’s advancement chart includes two Signature Action Damage Increase columns: one for a tier 1 power roll and one for a tier 2 or 3 power roll. Whenever the retainer deals damage with their signature action, they deal extra damage equal to their total accrued damage bonuses for the appropriate tier. Advancement Example: A level 4 hero convinces a goblin guide, a level 1 harrier retainer, to join the party. The goblin guide immediately gains 3 levels. At level 2, the guide adds +1 to their 
Agility. At level 3, the guide gains a +2 bonus to free strike damage. At level 4, the guide chooses between the level 4 goblin guide advancement ability, Weaving Knives, or the level 4 support advancement ability, Knock Back. Additionally, having gained three levels, the guide’s 
stamina: increase by 30, to a total of 60. The damage dealt by their Signature Action increases by +2 (if they get a tier 1 result) or +3 (if they get a tier 2 or 3 result). ENCOUNTER ABILITIES Some retainer abilities have the Encounter keyword. Once a retainer uses this ability, they can’t use the same ability again until their mentor gains a Victory. CUSTOM RETAINERS includes many prebuilt retainers, but you can turn most monster stat blocks into retainers, provided they’re not a minion, a leader, or a boss. The Director has final say over whether any monster can be selected as a retainer. To build a custom retainer, follow the steps above. A custom retainer has no retainer-specific advancement abilities, so they must take the role advancement ability specific to their level and role. Advancement Example: A level 4 hero trains a striped condor griffon, a level 2 brute, gaining them as a retainer. The griffon immediately gains 2 levels. Since the griffon started at level 2, they don’t gain any level 2 benefits or advancement features. At level 3, the griffon gains a +2 bonus to free strike damage, their 
stamina: increases by 10 (from 80 to 90), and their Signature Action damage increases by 1 for tier 2 and 3 attacks. At level 4, the griffon gains the level 4 brute ability Big Windup, an extra 10 
stamina: (from 90 to 100), and an extra +1 Signature Action damage bonus for all tiers, for a total Signature Action damage increase of 1 (for tier 1) and 2 (for tier 2 and 3). ROLE ABILITIES When a retainer reaches level 4, 7, or 10, they can choose to learn one of the following role abilities. A retainer only qualifies for the role ability that matches their role and level. Some role abilities have the magic or psionic keyword. Depending on the nature of a monster, you can swap the Magic keyword for Psionic or vice versa, or remove it entirely if your monster achieves the same results through gadgetry or martial prowess. AMBUSHER ABILITIES LEVEL 4 ROLE ADVANCEMENT ABILITY Go for the Jugular (Action, Encounter) - 2d10 + highest characteristic Keywords Melee, Strike, Weapon Distance Reach 1 Target One creature ✦ ≤11 5 damage; M (weak) bleeding (save ends) ★ 12–16 9 damage; M (average) bleeding (save ends) ✸ 17 12 damage; M (strong) bleeding (save ends) Effect If the target is grabbed or the retainer had an edge on the power roll, the retainer gains two surges. LEVEL 7 ROLE ADVANCEMENT ABILITY Hamstring Slice (Action, Encounter) - 2d10 + highest characteristic Keywords Melee, Ranged, Strike, Weapon Distance Reach 1 or Ranged 5 Target One creature ✦ ≤11 7 damage; M (weak) slowed (EoT) ★ 12–16 10 damage; M (average) slowed (save ends) ✸ 17 15 damage; M (strong) slowed and target can’t use triggered actions (save ends) Effect The retainer and their mentor can move up to their speed. LEVEL 10 ROLE ADVANCEMENT ABILITY Hold ‘Em Down (Action, Encounter) - 2d10 + highest characteristic Keywords Melee, Ranged, Strike, Weapon Distance Reach 1 or Ranged 5 Target One creature ✦ ≤11 11 damage; if the target is size: 1 or smaller, they are M (weak) grabbed ★ 12–16 16 damage; if the target is size: 1 or smaller, they are M (average) grabbed ✸ 17 21 damage; if the target is size: 1 or smaller, they are M (strong) grabbed Effect The retainer gains two surges when a creature attacks the grabbed target. ARTILLERY ABILITIES LEVEL 4 ROLE ADVANCEMENT ABILITY Supporting Volley (Triggered Action) Keywords – Distance Ranged 5 Target One creature Trigger The retainer’s mentor makes an attack against the target. Effect The retainer makes a ranged free strike against the target. LEVEL 7 ROLE ADVANCEMENT ABILITY Line ‘Em Up (Action, Encounter) - 2d10 + highest characteristic Keywords Area, Ranged, Weapon Distance 10 x 1 line within 1 Target All enemies ✦ ≤11 7 damage; M (weak) prone ★ 12–16 11 damage; M (average) prone ✸ 17 16 damage; M (strong) prone LEVEL 10 ROLE ADVANCEMENT ABILITY Ricochet Shot (Action, Encounter) - 2d10 + highest characteristic Keywords Strike, Ranged, Weapon Distance Ranged 5 Target One creature or object ✦ ≤11 9 damage ★ 12–16 14 damage ✸ 17 19 damage Effect The retainer can also target a second creature or object within 5 squares of the target and with line of effect to the target. The retainer doesn’t need line of effect to the second target but must be aware of their location. BRUTE ABILITIES LEVEL 4 ROLE ADVANCEMENT ABILITY Big Windup (Maneuver) Keywords – Distance Self Target Self Effect Until the next turn, attacks against the retainer gain an edge. At the beginning of the retainer’s next turn, they gain two surges, and their forced movement abilities used that turn move a creature 2 extra squares. LEVEL 7 ROLE ADVANCEMENT ABILITY Overhand Swat (Action, Encounter) - 2d10 + highest characteristic Keywords Melee, Strike, Weapon Distance Melee 1 Target One creature ✦ ≤11 8 damage ★ 12–16 13 damage; push 2 ✸ 17 16 damage; push 3; M (strong) prone Effect If a target ends their forced movement in a square adjacent to the retainer’s mentor, the mentor can make a melee free strike against the target. LEVEL 10 ROLE ADVANCEMENT ABILITY Dizzying Sweep (Action, Encounter) - 2d10 + highest characteristic Keywords Area, Melee, Weapon Distance 1 burst Target All creatures ✦ ≤11 10 damage; push 1 ★ 12–16 14 damage; push 2 ✸ 17 20 damage; push 4 Effect The retainer is dazed until the end of their next turn. CONTROLLER ABILITIES LEVEL 4 ROLE ADVANCEMENT ABILITY Fire Blast (Action, Encounter) - 2d10 + highest characteristic Keywords Area Distance 3 cube within 10 Target All creatures ✦ ≤11 4 damage; push 2 ★ 12–16 6 damage; push 3 ✸ 17 10 damage; push 5 Effect When the retainer chooses this ability, they can choose one of the following damage types: acid, cold, lightning, poison, sonic, weapon. The ability deals this damage instead. LEVEL 7 ROLE ADVANCEMENT ABILITY Oil Slick (Action, Encounter) - 2d10 + highest characteristic Keywords Melee, Strike, Weapon Distance 3 cube within 10 Target All enemies ✦ ≤11 5 poison damage; M (weak) prone ★ 12–16 8 poison damage; M (average) prone ✸ 17 11 poison damage; M (strong) prone Effect The area becomes difficult terrain for every creature except the retainer’s mentor. While in the area, a creature gains fire vulnerability 5, and if a creature ends their turn with 0 speed remaining while in the area they fall prone. LEVEL 10 ROLE ADVANCEMENT ABILITY Shattering Shards (Action, Encounter) - 2d10 + highest characteristic Keywords Melee, Strike, Weapon Distance Ranged 10 Target One M or smaller object ✦ ≤11 7 damage ★ 12–16 11 damage ✸ 17 16 damage Effect The area within 2 squares of the object becomes difficult terrain. Each enemy in the area takes the same damage that the object took. DEFENDER ABILITIES LEVEL 4 ROLE ADVANCEMENT ABILITY Watch Out! (Triggered Action, Encounter) Keywords – Distance Melee 1 Target 1 creature Trigger The retainer’s mentor is targeted with a melee attack. Effect The retainer pushes the attacker or the mentor up to 2 squares. If the push moves the mentor out of range of the attack, the attack has no effect. LEVEL 7 ROLE ADVANCEMENT ABILITY It’s Me You Want! (Action, Encounter) - 2d10 + highest characteristic Keywords Melee, Strike, Weapon Distance Melee 1 Target 2 creatures ✦ ≤11 7 damage; taunted (EoT) ★ 12–16 11 damage; taunted (save ends) ✸ 17 16 damage; taunted (save ends) LEVEL 10 ROLE ADVANCEMENT ABILITY Last Stand (Action, Encounter) - 2d10 + highest characteristic Keywords Area, Melee, Weapon Distance Melee 1 Target 1 enemy ✦ ≤11 8 damage ★ 12–16 13 damage ✸ 17 17 damage Effect The retainer and their mentor each gain 10 Temporary 
stamina:. Each winded ally within 2 of the retainer can spend a Recovery. HARRIER ABILITIES LEVEL 4 ROLE ADVANCEMENT ABILITY Knock Back (Action, Encounter) - 2d10 + highest characteristic Keywords Charge, Melee, Strike, Weapon Distance Melee 1 Target 1 enemy ✦ ≤11 5 damage; push 1 ★ 12–16 9 damage; push 2 ✸ 17 12 damage; push 4 LEVEL 7 ROLE ADVANCEMENT ABILITY Meet You There (Action, Encounter) - 2d10 + highest characteristic Keywords Melee, Strike, Weapon Distance Melee 1 Target 1 creature ✦ ≤11 7 damage ★ 12–16 10 damage ✸ 17 15 damage Effect Before or after the attack, the retainer and their mentor can shift up to their speed. LEVEL 10 ROLE ADVANCEMENT ABILITY Nab and Stab (Action, Encounter) - 2d10 + highest characteristic Keywords Area, Melee, Weapon Distance 1 burst Target All creatures ✦ ≤11 11 damage; M (weak) grabbed ★ 12–16 16 damage; M (average) grabbed ✸ 17 21 damage; M (strong) grabbed Effect After the attack, the retainer can shift 2 while carrying a grabbed creature their size: or smaller. HEXER ABILITIES LEVEL 4 ROLE ADVANCEMENT ABILITY Backfire Curse (Action, Encounter) - 2d10 + highest characteristic Keywords Magic, Strike, Range Distance Ranged 10 Target 1 enemy ✦ ≤11 2 corruption damage; cursed (EoT) ★ 12–16 5 corruption damage; cursed (EoT) ✸ 17 7 corruption damage; cursed (EoT) Effect While cursed, when the target makes an attack that targets one creature, the retainer can use a free triggered action to choose a second target within the attack’s range. LEVEL 7 ROLE ADVANCEMENT ABILITY Take Root (Action, Encounter) - 2d10 + highest characteristic Keywords Attack, Magic Distance Ranged 10 Target 1 creature ✦ ≤11 5 damage; M (weak) slowed (save ends) ★ 12–16 9 damage; M (average) slowed (save ends) ✸ 17 12 damage; M (strong) slowed (save ends) Effect While slowed, if a target ends their turn without moving on that turn, they are restrained (save ends) instead of slowed (save ends). LEVEL 10 ROLE ADVANCEMENT ABILITY Mazed (Action, Encounter) - 2d10 + highest characteristic Keywords Area, Magic Distance ranged 10 Target 1 creature ✦ ≤11 7 damage; M (weak) mazed ★ 12–16 11 damage; M (average) mazed ✸ 17 16 damage; M (strong) mazed Effect While mazed, the target is dazed. Also, at the end of the target’s turn, the retainer can cause the target to move up to their speed in a straight line in a direction of the retainer’s choice. This movement ends before the target enters damaging or difficult terrain. This is not forced movement. MOUNT ABILITIES LEVEL 4 ROLE ADVANCEMENT ABILITY Cavalry Charge (Action, Encounter) - 2d10 + highest characteristic Keywords Charge, Melee, Strike, Weapon Distance Melee 1 Target 1 enemy ✦ ≤11 6 damage ★ 12–16 8 damage ✸ 17 11 damage Effect If this ability is used as part of the Charge action, the mount’s rider can make a melee free strike as a free triggered action. LEVEL 7 ROLE ADVANCEMENT ABILITY Giddyup! (Move, Encounter) Keywords - Distance Self Target Self Effect The mount shifts twice their speed. They can jump as part of this movement. LEVEL 10 ROLE ADVANCEMENT ABILITY Rearing Trample (Action, Encounter) - 2d10 + highest characteristic Keywords Area, Melee, Weapon Distance 1 burst Target All enemies ✦ ≤11 10 damage; M (weak) prone ★ 12–16 15 damage; M (average) prone ✸ 17 21 damage; M (strong) prone Effect If a creature is knocked prone by the ability or is already prone, the attack deals 5 damage. SUPPORT ABILITIES LEVEL 4 ROLE ADVANCEMENT ABILITY Battlefield Medic (Maneuver) Keywords – Distance Melee 1 Target Self or ally Effect The target spends a Recovery and gains a shield until the start of the retainer’s next turn. LEVEL 7 ROLE ADVANCEMENT ABILITY Focus Fire (Action, Encounter) - 2d10 + highest characteristic Keywords Range, Strike, Weapon Distance Ranged 5 Target One creature ✦ ≤11 9 damage ★ 12–16 13 damage ✸ 17 18 damage Effect Give an ally within range 2 surges. LEVEL 10 ROLE ADVANCEMENT ABILITY Back from the Dead (Action, Encounter) Keywords Melee Distance Melee 1 Target One ally Effect If a target has 0 or less 
stamina: or has died due to 
stamina: loss since the end of the retainer’s last turn, the target is alive with 1 
stamina: and can spend a Recovery. 