OLOTHEC MALICE 
# MALICE FEATURES
At the start of an olothec’s turn, you can spend malice to activate one of the following features. Psychic Shock ◆ 3 Malice The olothec reaches into the minds of anyone falling under their influence to deliver a debilitating mental attack. Each slimed, transformed, or devolved creature makes a 
Reason test. ✸ ≤11 16 psychic damage; frightened (save ends) ★ 12–16 13 psychic damage; frightened (EoT) ✸ 17+ 7 psychic damage Writhing Envelopment (Maneuver) ◆ 2d10 + 4 ◆ 5 Malice Keywords Melee, Strike, Weapon Distance Melee 3 Target One slimed, transformed, or devolved creature ✦ ≤11 11 psychic damage; A<2 grabbed ★ 12–16 17 psychic damage; A<3 grabbed ✸ 17 20 psychic damage; A<4 grabbed Effect The olothec pulls a target grabbed as part of this ability adjacent to them. The olothec has a double edge on strikes against a creature grabbed this way, and a grabbed target can’t save against any other effects until they are no longer grabbed. Memory of Chaos ◆ 7 Malice The olothec broadcasts their memory of the universe in its primordial state, a sweeping cacophony of transcendental irrationality and unceasing change utterly anathema to the ordered mind. Until the end of the encounter, any creature that starts their turn within 3 of the olothec is R<3 slowed and dazed (EoT). SLIME SERVANTS Slime servants are creatures that have been changed through the powers of the olothec. their flesh devolves into a translucent primordial state. The creature loses their memories and sense of self, becoming a slime servant NPC who is loyal to the olothec. The slime servant retains all their original statistics and gains the following traits: • Being of the Deep. The slime servant can breathe air and water. They add the swim keyword to their speed. • Dulled Mind. The slime servant cannot be taunted or frightened. • Servant Senses. The olothec can sense anything the slime servant senses, and if the slime servant can speak, the olothec can speak through their body. Only technology from the upper worlds, particularly products of evolutionary advancements made by the voiceless talkers, can restore a slime servant’s memories and return them to their original state. 