UNDEAD MALICE LEVEL 1+ 
# MALICE FEATURES
At the start of any undead’s turn, you can spend malice to activate one of the following features. Paranormal Fling ◆ 3 Malice Up to three objects on the encounter map that aren’t held or tethered to the ground float 1 square off the ground. Each object is then pulled 5 squares toward the nearest enemy within 3 squares of the object. Abyssal Rift ◆ 5 Malice Ravenous and rotting undead arms burst forth from 9 connected squares of a vertical or horizontal surface. A creature who ends their turn adjacent to an affected square makes an 
Agility test. ✸ ≤11 5 damage; restrained (save ends) ★ 12–16 5 damage; restrained (EoT) ✦ 17+ 5 damage A creature who starts their turn restrained by the arms takes 1d6 damage. Dread March ◆ 7 Malice Each undead creature in the encounter moves up to their speed and makes a free strike. If an undead creature is reduced to 
stamina: 0 during this dread march, they don’t die until their movement and attacks are resolved. Intensity Tally At the end of each round, keep an intensity tally of the number of living heroes not adjacent to one or more undead creatures. When the tally reaches the number of heroes in the encounter, you can spend malice to activate the following feature. Ravenous Horde (3 Malice) Each living hero in the encounter is beset by two winded rotting zombies who burst out of unoccupied spaces 4 squares away. The number of rotting zombies increases to three per hero when three or fewer heroes remain alive in the encounter. The intensity tally resets to 0. 